Okay, the tapes are on again. As an English professor and a creative writing
teacher, how does most science fiction stack up from that perspective? Well,
that's the greatest problem a science fiction reader has, is finding the good
and avoiding the bad, because it's such a popular genre that there's a lot of
really kind of ordinary stuff being published. And I'm teaching a course in
science fiction now and I have found that the books we're using are really good.
I think they're excellent books. They're very difficult to teach in the manner
in which one teaches a fine novel because they're written as entertainment. The
texture is not so tightly woven. but ideas are there. In essence, what you do is
discuss the ideas. So really, one of the great skills for the science fiction
reader is learning how to find good stuff, using reviews, using as much as
possible histories of science fiction, reading the big names, and working out
from there. I know some science fiction scholars like Sam Moskowitz are kind of
encyclopedias of just enormous quantities of material that they have read. And
that's one approach to it. That's not my own because I don't see the necessity
of knowing and mastering mediocre writing. And really in mainstream fiction, we
do the same thing. we try to avoid the bad. And I think it's kind of strange
that people who scorn science fiction often scorn it for the bad stuff, but they
don't read bad stuff in mainstream fiction if they can help it. They just read
the best. It's getting so there is enough science fiction, so there is a lot
that you can say, yes, this is good. This is the best. and you don't have to
read really inferior material until you become so enthusiastic or so bludgeoned
or tired or whatever that you don't care. I think it was Barry Maltzberg that
said that science fiction is, I think he included racial minorities and modern
dance as the three things that are judged by their worst examples. Yeah, yeah. I
agree Is there anybody Who are the people that you tend to like Do you tend to
read hard science fiction Fantasy Everything pretty Catholic in your taste Yeah
I tend to read fairly broadly I am Extremely fond of Ursula Le Guin In almost
All her phases I think Arthur C. Clarke is excellent Um I like some of John
Wyndham, particularly The Day of the Triffids, and of course the older people
like H.G. Wells are fine. Isaac Asimov is almost always good. I think his
Foundation Trilogy is a book that does something to the mind of the sensitive
reader from which he will never recover. That is, it enlarges thought. and just
as Clarke's work gives one a sense of the ongoing human quest, the meeting of
challenges and moving beyond them that is really very fine. These are the ones I
like the best. Of course, there are lots of individual books like Miller's
Canticul for Leibowitz that are good. I myself am not too fond of Heinlein. I
know that's probably a heretical statement, but I read a statement he made about
how to write that I think put me off a little bit. He said, write as fast as you
can, keep writing, and never revise. And I thought, wait a minute, we deserve
better than that.
I don't particularly care for Heinlein either. I didn't read him as a kid, and I
started trying to read him as an adult, and I think that was a mistake. I think
if you read him as a kid, he's probably not so bad. Yeah, I think you're right.
You're on a faculty in a small university. How do your peers take your writing?
Okay, it's one thing to write something esoteric and get it into a journal, but
your commercial, how does that set with people? Well, it's really, it has been a
lot of fun for me because, you know, really, if you write an article for PMLA,
it takes you fully as long as writing a whole novel. and you do this and you get
it published and you never hear anything about it again it's as though you took
it and put it in a bonfire somewhere maybe it'll appear in a bibliography
somewhere or someone might mention it in a footnote but it's as though it's some
sort of ritual that one does that you like pain or something But I keep meeting
people on the campus whose eyes are red because they got reading my novel and
stayed up almost all night reading it. And they're all very responsive and very
amused, and they think it's great. They don't think I've sold out because
they're too interested in... I guess I'm the first novelist that Principia
College has ever had. It's a new thing for them, and they're enjoying it as much
as I am, I think.
How do you handle the writing? You do it after hours, every night, every
weekend, take up all your spare time, or what? No, I am involved in too many
other things to do it in all my spare time, but when I'm involved in a novel, I
do think about it a great deal. and I try to work every day if I can but
sometimes particularly in the month of May I'll have about 4 or 5 days go by I
can't get to it and I tend to write in bursts on weekends and really summers are
the most productive times because then I can set aside some time every day and
work on it And then what I'm not working on, and I'm thinking about it. It
changes the nature of the novel, though, to have to write it slowly because
you're doing other things.
Because things occur to you. Before you get a scene written, you see it's not
going to work. Or a new angle occurs to you. Or an additional aspect of the
scene comes. So I think in a sense it enriches the novel, but it also demands
more rewriting because you do lose the sense of continuity.
Do you go to the conventions and meet the fans and the other writers and get
inspiration that way? I have only been to two conventions of the Science Fiction
Research Association, which is an affiliate of the Modern Language Association,
and it's not a typical con. I'm going to go to the Archon in St. Louis this
summer, and I've met some of the St. Louis fans. They're really nice people, so
I'm not in that scene yet. I don't know much about it. I think, from what I've
heard, a lot of it's kind of bizarre with people dressing up as monsters and
stuff.
Yeah, you get your stereotypical type fans there. That's for sure. One person
you might be interested in talking to in St. Louis is Glenn Cook because I
thought of him when I was reading your battle scenes because he's got the
trilogy where all the battle scenes are laid out and the strategies and that
sort of thing. Wow. I think you've met him. Some people tell me I ought to get
to know him. Yeah, he's exactly who I thought about. Now, the similarities
between the stories aren't that close, but you have that characteristic in
common. I believe he has studied battles and that sort of thing, though. That's
kind of what inspired my question. I see. Any plans for books outside the Three
Rivers area, something more towards hard science fiction or other historical
type science fiction? or have you thought that far ahead? I really haven't
thought that far ahead. I'm sort of three books ahead of myself now. For a long
time, I've wanted to write a historical novel about 19th century Illinois, in
fact, for far longer than I've been writing science fiction, and I may take time
out to do that, if I can find the time. I don't want to interrupt the kind of
onrushing perceptions I'm having, though, with the science fiction series. So
I'll just let that ride for now. I think that in a sense, when I planned that
novel years ago, the idea of writing a novel just sort of kept me in awe. I
wasn't sure I could do it. Now I am. And because the breaking of Northwall
really surprised me into doing it, I discovered that I could I'm really glad
that I was able to take what you might call a light-hearted approach toward the
writing of the novel and see that it is actually possible to do that.
To kind of wrap things up how does one go about selling a first novel? Well
I don't know that I know what you do of course is kind of study the market find
out the ones that you would really like to sell to and make what I call a
hierarchical list starting with the best in my case I started with Del Rey I
thought that was the best and they took it so I didn't that's why I say I don't
know because it's usually a much more complicated process. Many publishers want
you to send two chapters and an outline of the rest, or to send a query letter
first. But luckily, I ran into Judy Del Rey in New York at a Modern Language
Association meeting, and I asked her, I told her, I have this manuscript, would
you read it if I sent it to you? And she was interested but very mildly so and
she said yes I'll read it. I don't guarantee to do it very rapidly but yes we
always do read on solicited manuscripts. And so I finally sent it the next June,
this was December, I sent it in June and did not hear from them until the
following March. So one of the techniques is patience. but I I said to myself as
long as it's out there it's not coming back and the longer it's out there maybe
the better it is you know but I had a very easy time I was very fortunate Did
you start writing the second one while the first one was still up there
gestating? No I started writing it the day after Owen Locke who is the editor
there, called me and said they were going to take The Breaking of Northwall,
and he said, do you have anything else? And I said, no, I was waiting to see how
this one would go. But I was so thrilled by the acceptance that this idea that
had been kind of germinating in my mind immediately came into focus, and I began
outlining.
Okay, that's the list of questions. Thank you.